#This file was created by <arc> Thu Jul 16 23:57:08 1998
#LyX 0.12 (C) 1995-1998 Matthias Ettrich and the LyX Team
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language default
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle headings

\layout Title

Unix Desktop Environment
\newline 

\size giant 
ude
\size default 

\newline 

\size larger 
the ultimate desktop experience
\layout Author

Some kind of a preview - or more a dream?
\layout Date


\size small 
by Jan Rocho and Christian Ruppert
\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \tableofcontents

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\latex latex 

\backslash 
pagebreak
\layout Section

Motivation - Yet another Window Manager?
\layout Standard

Right - there is quite a wide variety of window managers for X11-Unix machines,
 among them very good ones like fvwm and very comfortable and beautiful
 ones like kwm/kde.
 So why the f**k another WM? Well, we got our reasons (which hopefully soon
 will also be yours):
\layout Itemize

First of all both of us didn't like the 'conventional way of window managing'
 very much: For example to close a window which is completely covered with
 other windows at the moment you first have to click and drag away anything
 else just to reach the close button.
 Same thing if you are having a docu window in the background behind your
 active editor window ant the syntax you need is just covered by the sothern
 border of your editor.
 Wouldn't it be nice to be able to do any window action from any position
 - it would and now even is.
\layout Itemize

Then we were not very pleased with WM-features or concepts like the KDE-filemana
ger that don't do anything but slowing down the system.
\layout Itemize

We wanted a good and powerful filemanager which can almost be a shell substitute
 (of course a file manager will never achieve this completely, but e.g.
 TkDesk shows the right way) integrated into the WM without being an unremoveabl
e part of it.
\layout Itemize

Another point is that most window managers are quite hard to configure.
 uwm won't.
\layout Standard

Finally you should notice that this project was not started to dismiss or
 imitate KDE.
 We both appreciate what all the people are doing, not only for a group
 of freaks but also for the whole idea of Linux as well as the (very big
 and thank god in the moment very fast growing) group of Linux beginners
 and people who changed from Windows.
 Probably without KDE this project would not exist at all and I am planning
 to keep up a certain compatibility between KDE and ude.
 For example will it be possible to run all KDE applications under (later
 versions of) ude.
 Of course for example the colour configuration etc.
 will also be supported.
 We just didn't like some features of KDE, and we want to create a window
 manager which is not so much conventional but productive.
 In my opinion uwm will not be so much a window manager for people used
 to and liking the 'Windows' look and feel but more for everybody who doesn't
 like this very much.
\layout Standard
\added_space_top medskip 
ude - get used to it...
\layout Section

uwm and ugs - the basic elements of ude
\layout Subsection

uwm - the window manager
\layout Standard

ude's window manager will be called uwm, the ultimate window manager.
 It will break with most common look and feels and is palled to be at least
 as configurable as kde or windows.
 Of course, if we find some good designers, we will a.so try to make it as
 colourful and pretty as the two of them but top priority is a usable and
 practical high performance window manager with the following characteristics:
\layout Itemize

No title bars: uwm windows do not have a title bar with icons etc.
 the title will be displayed on a configurable place, but window action
 can not be taken by clicking on small icons on the title bar but rather
 by clicking somewhere on the border with the right button(s).
\layout Itemize

Configurable control bar: uwm will have an easily configurable control bar
 which will be integrated into the window manager itself due to performance
 reasons
\layout Itemize

High performance: uwm will not use anything like qt or other libraries that
 are slowing it down just to make it beautiful.
 There will also be no filemanager having to run all the time in background
 to make the control bar and the menus work.
\layout Subsection

ugs - the 'graphical shell' of ude
\layout Standard

I just called the ude file manager ugs - the ultimate graphical shell but
 the implementation of this part has not started yet (hohoho, programmers!),
 and here are some Ideas I have considering this which should explain the
 name graphical shell:
\layout Itemize

ugs should support a large variety of file types recognised and be able
 to call user defined programs clicking on the files.
\layout Itemize

ugs should have some kind of a terminal as input/output window (like a shell).
\layout Itemize

ugs should be able to communicate with the uwm about running processes in
 order to kill hung ones and other actions.
\layout Itemize

ugs should not have to be running all the time.
\layout Itemize

ugs should be able to create and extract archive files.
\layout Itemize

in general: ugs should be quite like TkDesk, Probably there's someone out
 there who likes to modify it to our needs.
\layout Itemize

perhaps (since the internet is becomeing more and more popular and important)
 parts of Netscape could be integrated somehow (as a loadable module or
 something)
\the_end
