README for uwm 0.2.8
====================

This is uwm, the ultimate window manager, which will be one day part of
ude, the unix desktop environment.

See the files INSTALL and INSTALL.UDE for compilation and installation
instructions.

For documentation on how to use and configure uwm, please check out the
file manual.dvi in the doc directory or the html documentation tree.

Please note that our url at ude.org is no longer available, the project
has migrated to sourceforge and can be reached at

                     http://udeproject.sourceforge.net.

Mirror pages also might be down or outaged due to some problems with the
migration.

Some of you might wonder about where the BETA in the version number has
gone, and yes, you're right: This is the first official stable release of
uwm. Although the program still lacks lots of functionality (for instance
full icccm 2.0 compliance, so we're still in the 0.2.x-es) I'ld like it to
have, I think it's time to face the fact that uwm has become quite a stable
and reliable program that no longer deserves a BETA in its version string.
Don't blame me for having written this if this is the first version that
crashes on your system - rather see it as another proof of murphys law ;)
And write a bug report of course!
Seriously: Seeing that I'm currently not having too much time to work on
uwm and that the current code is extremely stable (and the program better
than it ever was before) I wanted to make this version available to
everyone although the declared goal of icccm2.0-compliance is not fully
achieved yet.

Have fun with this first officially stable release.

Oh, and don't forget: We're still looking for developers, designers etc.
The more people work on this project the higher the chances are that one
day we'll reach a major version number of 1 (i.e. "all" features
implemented).
Contact me if you're interested.

ude - get used to it.


For bug reports, suggestions etc. please contact

                        Christian Ruppert <arc@gmx.li>

